Add LNS tutorial - Closes #1151 (#1158)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/tutorials/lns/4-tests.adoc

= Chapter 4: Tests
Mona Bärenfänger <mona@lightcurve.io>
// Settings
:toc: preamble
:toclevels: 4
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:imagesdir: ../../assets/images
:experimental:
// URLs
:url_wikipedia_functionaltesting: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_testing
// Project URLs
:url_lns_1_registervalidate: tutorials/lns/1-blockchain.adoc#validate
:url_lns_1_registerapply: tutorials/lns/1-blockchain.adoc#state-change
:url_lns_1_lookupapply: tutorials/lns/1-blockchain.adoc#state-change-2
:url_reference_testsuite: references/lisk-framework/test-suite.adoc
:url_test_suite_createvalidatecontext: references/lisk-framework/test-suite.adoc#returns-25
:url_test_suite_createapplycontext: references/lisk-framework/test-suite.adoc#returns-26
:url_test_suite_createdefaultapplicationenv: references/lisk-framework/test-suite.html#createdefaultapplicationenv

== Writing unit tests

> As last topic of this tutorial, we'll explore how the application can be tested with unit and network tests.

Author: ```suggestion
In the last chapter of this tutorial, it is covered how the application can be tested with unit and network tests.
```

> As last topic of this tutorial, we'll explore how the application can be tested with unit and network tests.

Author: ```suggestion
In the final chapter of this tutorial, we'll explore how the application can be tested with unit and network tests.
```

For the test, overwrite the default `asset` value (`undefined`) with a valid transaction asset for the Register asset.
For the function to be called successfully, overwrite the default transaction value of the context (`undefined`) with a transaction containing a property `senderAddress` with a Buffer of size 0.
No need to put a real address here in this case, as it isn't used in the tests.

==== Testing the apply() function

Tests for the xref:{url_lns_1_registerapply}[apply() function] of the Register asset.

Write tests to check the following:

* Valid cases:
** It should update the state store with the name hash key.
** It should update the state store with updated sender account.
** It should update the state store with correct ttl value.
** It should update the state store with correct expiry date.
* Invalid cases:
** It should throw error if name is already registered.

Before each test:

* Create a new default account for the LNS application.
* Add the newly created account to the `accounts` list of the `StateStore` mock.
* Spy on the functions `stateStore.chain.get` and `stateStore.chain.set`.

> This allows to check in the tests, if the respective functions have been called or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows checking in the tests if the respective functions have been called or not.
```

			});

			it('should update the state store with correct expiry date', async () => {
				const name = 'nazar.lsk';
				const node = getNodeForName(name);
				const context = testing.createApplyAssetContext({
					stateStore,
					asset: { name: 'nazar.lsk', ttl: 60 * 70, registerFor: 2 },
					transaction: { senderAddress: account.address } as any,
				});
				const expiryTimestamp = Math.ceil(addYears(new Date(), 2).getTime() / 1000);

				await transactionAsset.apply(context);

				const lsnObject = await getLNSObject(stateStore, node);

				expect(lsnObject?.expiry).toBeGreaterThanOrEqual(expiryTimestamp);
			});
		});

		describe('invalid cases', () => {
			it('should throw error if name is already registered', async () => {
				const context = testing.createApplyAssetContext({
					stateStore,
					asset: { name: 'nazar.lsk', ttl: 60 * 60, registerFor: 1 },
					transaction: { senderAddress: account.address } as any,
				});

				await transactionAsset.apply(context);

				await expect(transactionAsset.apply(context)).rejects.toThrow(
					'The name "nazar.lsk" already registered',
				);
			});
		});
	});
});
----

=== Testing the Reverse Lookup asset

> The complete code of the tests for the Reverse Lookup asset is described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The entire code for the tests of the Reverse Lookup asset is described below.
```

> Most of the code is self-explanatory, but the most important parts of the tests are summarized here for a better overview:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The majority of the code is self-explanatory, however, the most important parts of the tests are summarized here to provide a better overview:
```

==== Testing the apply() function

Tests for the xref:{url_lns_1_lookupapply}[apply() function] of the Reverse Lookup asset.

Write tests to check the following:

* Valid cases:

> ** It should update the lns reverse-lookup of the sender account with given node if not already set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** It should update the lns reverse-lookup of the sender account with the given node if it is not already set.
```

> ** It should update the lns reverse-lookup of the sender account with given node even if already set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** It should update the lns reverse-lookup of the sender account with the given node even if it is already set.
```

* Invalid cases:

> ** It should throw error if node to set-lookup is not owned by sender.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** It should throw an error if the node to set-lookup is not owned by the sender.
```

Before each test:

* Create a new default account for the LNS application.
* Add two registered names to the account: `john.lsk` and `doe.lsk`.
* Add the newly created account to the `accounts` list of the `StateStore` mock.
* Spy on the functions `stateStore.chain.get` and `stateStore.chain.set`.

> This allows to check in the tests, if the respective functions have been called or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows checking to be performed in the tests, if the respective functions have been called or not.
```

Author: ```suggestion
This allows checking in the tests, if the respective functions have been called or not.
```

				expect((await updatedAccount).lns.reverseLookup).toEqual(ownNodes[0]);
			});
		});

		describe('invalid cases', () => {
			it('should throw error if node to set-lookup is not owned by sender', async () => {
				const context = testing.createApplyAssetContext({
					stateStore,
					asset: { name: 'alpha.lsk' },
					transaction: { senderAddress: account.address } as any,
				});

				await expect(transactionAsset.apply(context)).rejects.toThrow(
					'You can only assign lookup node which you own.',
				);
			});
		});
	});
});
----

== Writing functional tests

{url_wikipedia_functionaltesting}[Functional testing] is a quality assurance (QA) process and a type of black-box testing that bases its test cases on the specifications of the software component under test. Functions are tested by feeding them input and examining the output, and internal program structure is rarely considered (unlike white-box testing).
Functional testing is conducted to evaluate the compliance of a system or component with specified functional requirements.
Functional testing usually describes what the system does.

> As a last exercise, write a functional test, that checks if a domain name was correctly resolved after calling the action `lns:resolveName`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a final exercise, it is recommended to write a functional test that checks if a domain name was correctly resolved after calling the action `lns:resolveName`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
As a final exercise, write a functional test, that checks if a domain name was correctly resolved after calling the action `lns:resolveName`.
```

Create a new file `lns_modules.spec.ts` in the `test/network/` folder:

----
.
├── _setup.js
├── commands
├── integration
├── network
│   └── lns_modules.spec.ts
├── tsconfig.json
├── unit
│   └── modules
│       └── lns
│           ├── assets
│           │   ├── register.spec.ts
│           │   └── reverse_lookup.spec.ts
│           └── lns.spec.ts
└── utils
----

The functional test should verify the following:

> * `resolveName` action of the LNS module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `resolveName` action of the LNS module.
```

> ** It should throw error on resolving non-registered name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** It should throw an error on resolving a non-registered name.
```

> ** It should resolve name after registration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** It should resolve the name after registration.
```
